---
title: API call scripting with Scala and Ammonite
description: Ditch your GUI tool (Postman, Advanced REST client, etc) and build your collection of HTTP requests in a language close to your heart - Scala. Script your Web API interactions with sttp.
date:   2018-06-02 17:28:00
category: scala
tags: scala sttp http ammonite
published: false

---

I find **Advanced REST Client** too clunky when it comes to organising requests into collections/projects. **Postman** is much nicer but there's no way I am paying for a subscription just to be able to share my project with the team. IntelliJ IDEA (Ultimate edition only) offers a handy but _very_ cumbersome HTTP Client plugin.

Having battled with these three I decided I've had enough of clicking buttons, and working around various limitations - after all I am a Scala developer and can script up any kind of Web API interaction in Scala, provided I find a decent enough library.

Let's take a look at Software Mill's **sttp** HTTP client library. And while we're at it, let's also take a look at Ammonite REPL - Scala REPL on steroids.



Here's sttp's github page: https://github.com/softwaremill/sttp
Let's have a quick play around with it - install [Ammonite (REPL)](http://ammonite.io/)

```bash
#for mac users with Homebrew
brew install ammonite-repl
```

Fire up Ammonite REPL by typing `amm` and then paste the following code into the console:

{% highlight scala %}
import $ivy.`com.softwaremill.sttp::core:1.2.0-RC2`
import com.softwaremill.sttp._
implicit val backend = HttpURLConnectionBackend()
sttp.get(uri"http://httpbin.org/ip").send()
{% endhighlight %}

You will see the truncated response in the output. Ammonite will truncate output at a certain point, but you can make it show you the whole output by using the predefined `show` function.
i.e. if the result of making the GET call was assigned to res3, you can type `show(res3)` to see the output in its entirety.

You may also want to change the defaults for the REPL pretty-printer like so:

```
repl.pprinter() = repl.pprinter().copy(defaultHeight = 5)
```

## sttp

So we saw the basics, and that was as quick as it gets. Let's dive a little deeper, beyond a basic GET command.

sttp will execute http(s) requests over a pluggable backend, but we'll use the basic HttpURLConnection-based implementation provided out of the box._

```scala
implicit val backend = HttpURLConnectionBackend()
```


[1]:http://typelevel.org/cats/
[2]:https://blog.jetbrains.com/scala/2017/11/28/intellij-idea-scala-plugin-2017-3-lightbend-project-starter-ammonite-support-parallel-indexing-and-more/
